Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
scavenging of anaesthetic gases. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is scavenging, and why is it necessary?
Scavenging is the collection of the waste anaesthetic gases and vapours that are
vented from the breathing system and the ventilator,
and their removal from the theatre environment to a safe place of disposal,
so that they are not allowed to pollute the air that theatre staff breathe.
It is necessary because, during the delivery of anaesthesia,
a continuous excess of gas — the fresh gas flow in excess of the patient's uptake,
together with expired anaesthetic gases — is vented from the adjustable
pressure-limiting valve and the ventilator, and this waste gas,
containing nitrous oxide and volatile anaesthetic agents,
would otherwise escape into the theatre and contaminate the atmosphere that the
staff breathe throughout their working lives.
The concern is twofold. The first is the potential occupational health hazard of
chronic exposure of theatre personnel to trace concentrations of anaesthetic gases,
which has been the subject of long-standing concern regarding possible effects on
health and reproduction.
The second is the broader environmental impact of releasing these greenhouse gases.
Scavenging addresses the occupational concern by capturing the waste gas at source
and conducting it away from the breathing zone of the staff to disposal,
greatly reducing the ambient concentration of anaesthetic gases in the theatre.
It is a standard and required feature of modern anaesthetic practice,
complemented by good theatre ventilation.
So scavenging is the collection of waste anaesthetic gases vented from the
breathing system and ventilator and their conduct to safe disposal,
necessary to prevent the pollution of the theatre atmosphere with nitrous oxide and
volatile agents and so to protect theatre staff from the potential occupational
hazards of chronic trace exposure, as well as to limit environmental release.
What are the concerns about occupational exposure to anaesthetic gases?
The concerns about the occupational exposure of theatre staff to trace
concentrations of anaesthetic gases have driven the development of scavenging and
the setting of exposure limits, and an account of them explains the rationale for
scavenging, though the evidence is nuanced.
Theatre personnel — anaesthetists, surgeons,
nurses and others — may be exposed over many years to low,
trace concentrations of nitrous oxide and volatile agents escaping into the theatre
air.
Historical epidemiological studies raised concerns that such chronic exposure might
be associated with adverse health effects,
including possible effects on reproduction such as an increased risk of miscarriage
and reduced fertility, and concerns about effects on the bone marrow,
the liver and neurological and cognitive function,
nitrous oxide in particular being known to inactivate vitamin B-twelve and impair
related enzyme function with prolonged exposure.
However, much of the early evidence was from studies of variable quality and from
an era of poor or absent scavenging and high ambient concentrations,
and the evidence for harm at the low concentrations achieved with modern scavenging
and ventilation is weak and inconsistent,
so that the actual risk is now considered low.
Nonetheless, on the precautionary principle, exposure is minimised,
and recommended occupational exposure limits — maximum acceptable time-weighted
average concentrations — have been set for nitrous oxide and the volatile agents,
against which ambient theatre concentrations may be monitored.
So the occupational concern is that chronic trace exposure of theatre staff to
anaesthetic gases might cause adverse effects on reproduction, the bone marrow,
the liver and the nervous system, nitrous oxide affecting vitamin B-twelve;
though the evidence for harm at modern low concentrations is weak,
exposure is minimised on precautionary grounds,
with recommended exposure limits set and monitored.
Describe the components of a scavenging system.
A scavenging system is conventionally described as comprising several functional
components in sequence, from the point where waste gas leaves the breathing system
to its final disposal, and understanding these components organises an account of
how scavenging works.
The first is the collecting system,
which gathers the waste gas at its source — at the adjustable pressure-limiting
valve of the breathing system and at the exhaust of the ventilator — by means of a
shroud or connection that captures the vented gas and directs it into the
scavenging system, without affecting the function of the valve or ventilator.
The second is the transfer system, the tubing that conveys the collected gas away
from the collecting point to the next component;
this tubing is of a wide bore and uses connectors of a distinctive size,
conventionally thirty millimetres, that are non-interchangeable with the
breathing-system connectors, to prevent dangerous misconnection.
The third is the receiving system, or reservoir,
which accommodates the intermittent and variable flow of waste gas and acts as a
buffer between the patient's variable expiratory flow and the disposal system,
and which incorporates the crucial safety features protecting the patient from
excessive positive or negative pressure.
The fourth is the disposal system, which finally removes the gas from the receiving
system to the outside atmosphere or other safe disposal,
either passively or actively by an extraction pump.
These components together capture the waste gas and conduct it safely away.
So a scavenging system comprises a collecting system capturing waste gas at the
valve and ventilator, a transfer system of wide-bore non-interchangeable tubing
conveying it away, a receiving system or reservoir buffering the flow and
protecting the patient from pressure extremes,
and a disposal system removing the gas to the atmosphere passively or actively.
Distinguish active from passive scavenging systems.
Scavenging systems are broadly divided into active and passive types according to
how the waste gas is driven from the receiving system to disposal,
and the distinction is important because it determines the safety features required
and the performance achieved.
In a passive scavenging system, there is no powered extraction;
the waste gas is driven through the system and to the atmosphere by the patient's
own expiratory effort and the slight positive pressure of the vented gas itself,
flowing through wide-bore tubing to an exit to the outside,
such as a duct through the wall or roof,
or to the theatre's non-recirculating ventilation extract.
Passive systems are simple and require no power,
but their performance depends on there being a low resistance and a favourable
pressure gradient, they can be affected by wind and back pressure at the outlet,
and their capacity is limited.
In an active scavenging system, a powered extraction device — a pump or a
connection to the hospital's piped vacuum or a dedicated extraction system —
actively draws the waste gas from the receiving system and conducts it to disposal,
generating a flow that reliably removes the gas.
Active systems are more effective and are the standard in modern theatres,
but because they apply suction, they introduce the hazard that excessive negative
pressure could be transmitted to the patient's breathing system,
which must be guarded against by the design of the receiving system.
The receiving system of an active system therefore incorporates an air-break or
open reservoir and negative-pressure relief.
So passive scavenging relies on the patient's expiratory effort and the gas's own
pressure to drive it to the atmosphere, being simple but limited,
whereas active scavenging uses a powered pump or vacuum to draw the gas away,
being more effective and standard but requiring protection against the transmission
of negative pressure to the patient.
What safety features protect the patient from pressure transmitted by the
scavenging system?
A critical aspect of scavenging-system design is the protection of the patient from
any excessive positive or negative pressure that the system might otherwise
transmit back to the breathing system and the patient's lungs,
and these safety features, embodied chiefly in the receiving system,
are essential to safe scavenging.
The hazard is that the scavenging system is connected,
through the collecting and transfer systems, to the patient's breathing system,
so that any abnormal pressure in the scavenging system could be transmitted to the
patient. Two opposite dangers exist.
The first is excessive negative pressure: in an active system,
the suction of the extraction pump could, if applied directly,
draw gas out of the patient's lungs or breathing system,
causing the loss of the patient's gas, collapse of the lung,
or impairment of ventilation.
This is prevented by a negative-pressure relief mechanism in the receiving system —
an air-break or an open reservoir with an opening to the atmosphere,
or a negative-pressure relief valve,
so that the suction draws in room air rather than gas from the patient,
decoupling the patient from the vacuum.
The second danger is excessive positive pressure:
if the disposal route became obstructed,
waste gas could accumulate and the pressure rise,
transmitting a dangerous positive pressure to the patient's lungs and causing
barotrauma.
This is prevented by a positive-pressure relief mechanism — a valve or opening that
vents to the atmosphere if the pressure rises,
so that obstruction does not pressurise the patient.
Thus the receiving system protects against both extremes.
So the scavenging system protects the patient by a negative-pressure relief,
an air-break or open reservoir ensuring the active suction draws room air rather
than the patient's gas, and a positive-pressure relief venting to atmosphere should
the disposal route obstruct, preventing the transmission of dangerous negative or
positive pressure to the patient's lungs.
Why are the connectors of the scavenging system of a distinctive size?
The connectors used in the scavenging system are deliberately of a distinctive,
non-standard size, and the reason for this is an important safety consideration
concerned with preventing dangerous misconnection.
The scavenging system carries waste gas away from the breathing system,
and it is connected to the breathing system at the collecting point.
There is a potential for dangerous error if the components of the scavenging system
could be wrongly connected into the patient's breathing pathway,
or if breathing-system components could be connected to the scavenging system,
since a misconnection might, for example,
route the patient's fresh gas to the scavenging disposal,
or apply the scavenging conditions to the patient inappropriately.
To prevent such misconnections, the transfer and receiving components of the
scavenging system use connectors of a distinctive size — conventionally thirty
millimetres in diameter — which is different from, and non-interchangeable with,
the standard fifteen and twenty-two millimetre connectors of the breathing system
and the patient connections.
Because the scavenging connectors physically will not fit the breathing-system
connectors, and vice versa, the waste-gas pathway cannot be accidentally connected
into the patient's breathing pathway.
This is an application of the general principle,
seen throughout anaesthetic equipment,
of using non-interchangeable connectors to make dangerous misconnections physically
impossible.
So the scavenging system uses distinctive thirty-millimetre connectors,
non-interchangeable with the standard fifteen and twenty-two millimetre
breathing-system connectors, so that the waste-gas pathway cannot be accidentally
connected into the patient's breathing pathway — an application of the safety
principle of non-interchangeable connectors to prevent dangerous misconnection.
Describe the activated charcoal absorber as a method of scavenging.
The activated charcoal absorber is a simple,
passive device for removing volatile anaesthetic agents from waste gas by
adsorption, and it has a particular role and important limitations that the
anaesthetist must understand.
The device, an example being the activated charcoal canister,
is a container filled with activated charcoal,
a form of carbon with an enormous internal surface area,
through which the waste gas from the breathing system is passed;
the volatile anaesthetic agent molecules are adsorbed onto the surface of the
charcoal and so removed from the gas, the cleaned gas passing out.
Its advantages are that it is simple, portable,
requires no powered extraction or piped disposal,
and can be used where no scavenging system is available,
such as in remote locations or during transport or in the recovery area.
Its crucial limitation, however, is that activated charcoal adsorbs the volatile
agents but does not adsorb nitrous oxide, which passes through unaffected;
therefore it is useless for scavenging nitrous oxide and is only suitable when
volatile agents alone are being used.
A further limitation is that the charcoal has a finite capacity and becomes
saturated, after which it no longer adsorbs and may even release agent;
the canister must therefore be weighed or monitored and replaced when exhausted,
and warming can release adsorbed agent.
It also adds some resistance.
So the activated charcoal absorber passively removes volatile anaesthetic agents
from waste gas by adsorption onto its large charcoal surface,
being simple and portable for use without a scavenging system,
but it does not adsorb nitrous oxide and so is useless for it,
has a finite capacity requiring replacement when saturated,
and is suitable only when volatile agents alone are used.
What is the role of theatre ventilation in controlling anaesthetic gas pollution?
Theatre ventilation, the system that supplies and extracts air from the operating
theatre, plays an important complementary role to scavenging in controlling the
ambient concentration of anaesthetic gases,
and understanding this role completes the account of pollution control.
Even with effective scavenging, some anaesthetic gas inevitably escapes into the
theatre — from leaks in the breathing system,
around facemasks and supraglottic airways,
during disconnections and at the start and end of cases,
and from the patient's exhaled gas in recovery — and this fugitive gas must be
diluted and removed by the theatre's ventilation.
The theatre ventilation system continuously supplies fresh,
filtered air and extracts theatre air, providing a number of air changes per hour;
this dilutes any anaesthetic gas present and removes it,
keeping the ambient concentration low.
Importantly, for pollution control the theatre ventilation should be of a
non-recirculating type, extracting air to the outside rather than recirculating it,
so that anaesthetic gas is not returned to the theatre;
a high rate of air changes improves the dilution and removal.
The theatre ventilation thus works with the scavenging system:
scavenging captures the bulk of the waste gas at source,
while theatre ventilation dilutes and removes the residual fugitive gas,
the two together keeping ambient concentrations within recommended limits.
Good practice — minimising leaks, low-flow anaesthesia,
careful technique — reduces the fugitive gas.
So theatre ventilation controls anaesthetic gas pollution by continuously supplying
fresh air and extracting theatre air to the outside,
providing air changes that dilute and remove the fugitive gas escaping despite
scavenging, complementing the scavenging system,
with a non-recirculating system and a high air-change rate being important for
effective pollution control.
How may the volatile agents be captured rather than vented to the atmosphere?
In response to the growing concern about the environmental impact of venting
anaesthetic agents to the atmosphere,
technologies have been developed to capture the volatile agents from the waste gas
rather than releasing them, and an awareness of these reflects the increasing
importance of sustainability in anaesthesia.
Conventional scavenging conducts the waste anaesthetic gases to the outside
atmosphere, where the volatile agents and nitrous oxide, being greenhouse gases,
contribute to global warming.
Capture technologies aim instead to trap the volatile agents from the scavenged
waste gas before it is released.
These typically employ a canister containing an adsorbent material,
placed in the scavenging pathway, which adsorbs and retains the volatile agent
molecules from the waste gas as it passes through,
allowing the carrier gases to pass while the agent is captured;
the saturated canisters are then returned to a facility where the captured agent
may be recovered and potentially purified for reuse, or safely destroyed,
rather than being released to the atmosphere.
Such systems can substantially reduce the atmospheric release of volatile agents
from anaesthesia. They do not, however, capture nitrous oxide,
which requires separate measures, including the reduction or avoidance of its use
and dedicated destruction technologies.
These capture technologies complement the more fundamental measure of reducing
agent use through low-flow anaesthesia and agent choice.
So volatile agents may be captured, rather than vented,
by adsorbent canisters placed in the scavenging pathway that trap the agent for
later recovery and reuse or safe destruction,
substantially reducing atmospheric release,
though such systems do not capture nitrous oxide,
and they complement the reduction of agent use by low-flow technique and agent
choice.
What are the hazards and failures of scavenging systems themselves?
While scavenging systems protect staff from pollution,
the systems themselves can fail or introduce hazards, principally to the patient,
and a systematic awareness of these is important to their safe use.
The most serious hazards arise from the transmission of abnormal pressure to the
patient, as discussed: excessive negative pressure from an active system,
which could draw gas from the patient's lungs or impair ventilation,
prevented by the negative-pressure relief and air-break;
and excessive positive pressure from an obstructed disposal route,
which could cause barotrauma, prevented by the positive-pressure relief.
Failure or omission of these relief mechanisms is therefore dangerous.
Misconnection is a hazard, prevented by the distinctive non-interchangeable
connectors, but mis-assembly remains possible and must be checked.
Obstruction of the scavenging tubing — by kinking, blockage,
or freezing of condensate in an external duct in cold weather — can cause pressure
to build up, relieved by the positive-pressure relief but to be avoided.
Failure of an active extraction system, or its inadvertent disconnection,
leaves the waste gas unscavenged, polluting the theatre,
detected by gas monitoring or the smell of agent.
The activated charcoal absorber fails silently when saturated and does not remove
nitrous oxide.
The scavenging system must therefore be checked before use as part of the machine
check, confirming its connection and function,
and its performance is assured by correct assembly, the relief mechanisms,
and monitoring.
So scavenging hazards include the transmission of excessive negative or positive
pressure to the patient, prevented by relief mechanisms whose failure is dangerous,
misconnection prevented by distinctive connectors, obstruction of the tubing,
and failure of extraction leaving gas unscavenged — managed by the pressure-relief
safety features, non-interchangeable connectors, the pre-use check and monitoring.
Finally, draw together the principles of scavenging as they bear on practice.
Drawing the station together, scavenging is the means by which the waste
anaesthetic gases vented during anaesthesia are captured and removed from the
theatre to safe disposal, protecting theatre staff from the pollution of their
working atmosphere and limiting environmental release,
and understanding its principles and safety features is an important part of
equipment knowledge.
The need arises because a continuous excess of gas containing nitrous oxide and
volatile agents is vented from the breathing system and ventilator,
which would otherwise pollute the theatre and expose staff over many years to trace
concentrations, prompting concern, on precautionary grounds,
despite weak evidence of harm at modern low concentrations,
and the setting of exposure limits.
A scavenging system comprises a collecting system at the valve and ventilator,
a transfer system of distinctive non-interchangeable connectors preventing
misconnection, a receiving system buffering the flow and, crucially,
protecting the patient from excessive negative or positive pressure by relief
mechanisms, and a disposal system, active or passive,
removing the gas to the atmosphere.
The activated charcoal absorber offers simple passive removal of volatile agents
but not nitrous oxide.
Theatre ventilation complements scavenging by diluting and removing the residual
fugitive gas, and emerging capture technologies and low-flow anaesthesia reduce
environmental release.
The safety features protecting the patient from transmitted pressure,
the non-interchangeable connectors, and the pre-use check are essential.
So scavenging unites the protection of staff and the environment with rigorous
safeguards for the patient, and its principled use — with attention to its safety
features, its complement of theatre ventilation,
and the reduction of waste — is an integral part of safe and responsible
anaesthetic practice.
Describe the receiving system in more detail, including open and closed designs.
The receiving system, or reservoir, is the heart of the scavenging system's safety,
buffering the variable flow of waste gas and protecting the patient,
and it may be of an open or a closed design, a distinction worth understanding.
The waste gas leaving the patient's breathing system arrives at the receiving
system in an intermittent and variable flow,
since it depends on the patient's expiration and the cycling of the ventilator,
whereas the disposal system removes gas at a more constant rate;
the receiving system reconciles these by acting as a buffer reservoir.
In a closed receiving system, the reservoir is a bag,
and the system incorporates spring-loaded positive- and negative-pressure relief
valves: the positive-pressure relief valve opens to vent to the atmosphere if the
pressure rises, as on obstruction, and the negative-pressure relief valve opens to
admit room air if the suction creates excessive negative pressure,
so that the patient is protected from both extremes.
In an open receiving system, the reservoir is an open-ended canister or chamber
that is open to the atmosphere through an air-break — a gap open to room air — so
that the active extraction draws gas from the reservoir together with room air
through this opening, and any excess waste gas simply overflows to the atmosphere
through the same opening; the open air-break inherently provides both positive- and
negative-pressure relief, since the reservoir cannot be pressurised or evacuated
relative to the atmosphere.
The open design is simple and inherently safe in this respect.
So the receiving system buffers the variable waste-gas flow against the steady
disposal, and may be closed, using a bag with spring-loaded positive- and
negative-pressure relief valves, or open,
using a reservoir with an air-break open to the atmosphere that inherently provides
both forms of pressure relief — both protecting the patient from transmitted
pressure.
What flow rate does an active scavenging system require,
and how is it matched to the waste gas?
The active scavenging system, drawing waste gas away by powered extraction,
must provide an appropriate extraction flow rate, neither too little nor too much,
and matching this to the variable production of waste gas is an important design
consideration.
The waste gas is produced intermittently and variably:
it consists of the fresh gas flow in excess of the patient's uptake plus the peaks
of expired gas, so the instantaneous flow varies from little, during inspiration,
to high, during expiration, and the average depends on the fresh gas flow in use,
which may range from low-flow to high-flow anaesthesia.
The active extraction system must remove this gas reliably,
so its extraction flow rate is set to exceed the maximum average rate of waste-gas
production, commonly of the order of tens of litres per minute,
to ensure that gas does not accumulate.
However, if the extraction simply applied this suction directly to the breathing
system, the high extraction flow would,
during the inspiratory phase when little waste gas is being produced,
draw gas from the patient — the negative-pressure hazard.
The receiving system, with its air-break or reservoir and negative-pressure relief,
resolves this: it allows the extraction to draw the buffered waste gas together
with room air, so the constant extraction flow is satisfied by entraining room air
when waste-gas flow is low, decoupling the patient from the suction.
Thus the extraction flow is set to remove the waste gas reliably,
while the receiving system matches the constant extraction to the variable
production.
So an active system requires an extraction flow rate exceeding the maximum average
waste-gas production, of the order of tens of litres per minute,
and the receiving system's air-break or reservoir matches this constant extraction
to the variable, intermittent waste-gas flow by entraining room air when production
is low, protecting the patient from the suction.
How are ambient concentrations of anaesthetic gases monitored?
The monitoring of the ambient concentrations of anaesthetic gases in the theatre is
the means by which the effectiveness of scavenging and ventilation in controlling
pollution is assessed, and it allows comparison with the recommended occupational
exposure limits, so an account of it completes the picture of pollution control.
The purpose is to measure the trace concentrations of nitrous oxide and volatile
agents present in the air that staff breathe,
to confirm that they are kept below the recommended limits and to identify problems
such as leaks or inadequate scavenging.
Monitoring may be performed in several ways.
Personal monitoring assesses the exposure of individual staff,
for instance by a small passive sampler or badge worn by the person,
which adsorbs the agent over the working period and is then analysed to give a
time-weighted average exposure, or by an active personal sampler drawing air
through an adsorbent.
Environmental or area monitoring measures the concentration in the theatre air at
fixed points, by sampling the air and analysing it,
for instance by infrared analysis for the agents and nitrous oxide,
which can give continuous real-time readings,
or by drawing samples for laboratory analysis.
The results are compared with the recommended exposure limits,
expressed as time-weighted average concentrations over the working period.
Elevated concentrations prompt investigation of scavenging, ventilation,
leaks and technique.
Such monitoring is performed periodically or when a problem is suspected.
So ambient anaesthetic gas concentrations are monitored by personal sampling,
using worn passive badges or active samplers giving an individual's time-weighted
average exposure, and by environmental area monitoring,
using infrared or other analysis of theatre air,
the results compared with recommended exposure limits to confirm effective
pollution control and to detect leaks or scavenging failures.
What are the sources of fugitive gas leakage, and how are they minimised at source?
Despite effective scavenging of the gas vented through the proper pathway,
a quantity of anaesthetic gas escapes into the theatre by other routes — the
fugitive gas — and minimising this leakage at source is an important complement to
scavenging, so the sources and their control merit description.
Fugitive gas arises from several sources. Leaks from the breathing system itself —
at loose connections, around the seals of vaporisers,
and from worn components — release gas; these are minimised by maintenance,
a leak-free system and the pre-use leak check.
Leakage around the patient interface is a major source:
gas escapes around a poorly fitting facemask,
around an uncuffed tracheal tube or a supraglottic airway, which seals imperfectly,
and during airway manipulations; this is minimised by a good mask seal,
an appropriately sized and sealed airway, and avoiding leaks.
Spillage occurs during the connection and disconnection of the breathing system,
at induction and emergence, and during the filling of vaporisers, releasing agent;
careful technique and filling in a ventilated area reduce this.
The patient exhales anaesthetic gas in the recovery area,
a source of pollution there, addressed by recovery-area ventilation.
Inhalational induction, particularly by mask in children, releases considerable gas.
The use of low fresh gas flows reduces the total amount of gas used and so
available to leak.
So fugitive gas escapes from breathing-system leaks, around imperfect mask,
tube and supraglottic airway seals, during connections,
disconnections and vaporiser filling, and from the patient in recovery,
and is minimised at source by a leak-free maintained system, good airway seals,
careful technique, low fresh gas flows and adequate ventilation of theatre and
recovery.
What special considerations apply to scavenging during inhalational induction,
mask cases and paediatric anaesthesia?
Inhalational induction, anaesthesia by facemask or supraglottic airway,
and paediatric anaesthesia present particular challenges for scavenging and
pollution control, because they are associated with greater leakage,
and an account of these completes the practical picture.
Inhalational induction, in which the patient breathes increasing concentrations of
volatile agent and often nitrous oxide by facemask until anaesthetised,
is a significant source of pollution:
high concentrations of agent are delivered by an imperfectly sealed mask,
and gas escapes around the mask into the theatre, exposing staff;
this is common in paediatric practice,
where inhalational induction is frequently used.
Anaesthesia maintained by facemask or by a supraglottic airway,
which seals the airway less completely than a cuffed tracheal tube,
similarly allows more gas to leak around the interface than a sealed tracheal tube.
Paediatric anaesthesia compounds these because inhalational techniques are common,
and the small uncuffed tubes historically used sealed imperfectly.
The considerations and measures include achieving the best possible mask or airway
seal to reduce leakage; positioning the scavenging collection to capture as much
vented gas as possible; relying more heavily on good theatre ventilation to dilute
and remove the greater fugitive gas;
using cuffed tubes where appropriate to improve the seal;
minimising the duration of mask induction and high flows;
and considering intravenous induction where leakage is a particular concern.
Vigilance for the increased pollution of these techniques is important.
So inhalational induction, mask and supraglottic-airway anaesthesia,
and paediatric practice cause greater anaesthetic gas leakage around imperfect
seals, addressed by optimising the mask or airway seal,
positioning scavenging to capture vented gas, relying on good theatre ventilation,
using cuffed tubes and intravenous induction where appropriate,
and minimising the duration of high-leak techniques.
Why is nitrous oxide of particular environmental concern,
and how may it be controlled?
Nitrous oxide is of particular environmental concern among the anaesthetic gases,
distinct from the volatile agents, and its control requires specific measures,
so an account of it is warranted as environmental responsibility becomes
increasingly important.
Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas,
and additionally it depletes the stratospheric ozone layer,
and it is very long-lived in the atmosphere, persisting for around a century,
so that its release has a prolonged effect; furthermore,
because it is used in large volumes as a carrier gas,
the total quantity released from anaesthesia is considerable.
It is not captured by the activated charcoal absorbers that trap volatile agents,
nor by the volatile-agent capture technologies,
so conventional scavenging simply vents it to the atmosphere.
Its control therefore requires different approaches.
The most effective is to reduce or avoid its use:
many anaesthetics can be conducted without nitrous oxide,
using oxygen and air as the carrier with a volatile agent or total intravenous
anaesthesia, and its analgesic role can often be met otherwise.
A further major source of nitrous oxide emissions is leakage from the piped supply
and manifolds, sometimes a large proportion of that purchased,
so that attention to the integrity of the supply system,
and consideration of supplying nitrous oxide from smaller portable sources rather
than large piped systems, can reduce waste.
Dedicated nitrous oxide destruction technologies,
which catalytically break it down, are being developed for the waste-gas or supply
stream.
So nitrous oxide is of particular concern as a long-lived,
potent greenhouse and ozone-depleting gas used in large volumes and not captured by
conventional means, and it is controlled by reducing or avoiding its clinical use,
by addressing the substantial leakage from piped supplies and manifolds,
and by emerging dedicated destruction technologies.
What considerations apply to scavenging in remote, sedation and dental settings?
Scavenging in locations outside the main operating theatre — remote anaesthetising
sites, sedation settings and dental practice — presents particular considerations,
because the infrastructure of piped scavenging and theatre ventilation may be
absent, and an account of these completes the practical picture.
In the main operating theatre, piped active scavenging and a high-air-change
non-recirculating ventilation system are available;
in remote sites such as radiology, endoscopy, the emergency department,
or in dental and office-based practice, these may be lacking,
yet anaesthesia or sedation with anaesthetic gases is delivered,
creating a pollution risk.
Several considerations apply. Where piped scavenging is unavailable,
alternative means are used: an activated charcoal absorber can remove volatile
agents passively, though not nitrous oxide,
and a portable active extraction unit may be employed.
Good local ventilation of the room becomes especially important to dilute and
remove fugitive gas, and the adequacy of air changes should be considered.
Dental practice has historically used nitrous oxide and oxygen sedation
extensively, with particular concern about staff exposure given the often close
working and imperfect scavenging; dedicated scavenging nasal masks that incorporate
active extraction around the patient's nose are used to capture nitrous oxide at
source.
Techniques that avoid or minimise inhalational agents,
such as intravenous sedation or anaesthesia, reduce the problem.
Awareness of the increased pollution risk and attention to whatever scavenging and
ventilation are available are essential in these settings.
So scavenging in remote, sedation and dental settings is challenged by the absence
of piped scavenging and theatre ventilation,
addressed by activated charcoal absorbers for volatile agents, portable extraction,
good room ventilation, dedicated scavenging nasal masks in dentistry to capture
nitrous oxide at source, and the use of intravenous techniques to reduce
inhalational pollution.
What standards govern scavenging, and how is the system checked before use?
Scavenging systems are governed by standards and regulations,
and like the rest of the anaesthetic equipment they must be checked before use,
so an account of these completes the station.
The control of exposure to anaesthetic gases falls under occupational health and
safety regulations governing hazardous substances in the workplace,
which require that exposure be prevented or adequately controlled,
that control measures such as scavenging and ventilation be provided and
maintained, and that exposure be monitored against recommended limits;
these regulations underpin the requirement for scavenging.
The design and performance of scavenging systems are specified by equipment
standards, which define the components, the non-interchangeable connectors,
the pressure-relief requirements protecting the patient, and the performance,
ensuring that systems are safe and effective.
The scavenging system is checked before use as part of the routine pre-use check of
the anaesthetic machine: the anaesthetist confirms that the scavenging system is
connected, from the collecting connections at the breathing system and ventilator
through the transfer and receiving systems to the disposal;
that the active extraction, if used, is switched on and functioning,
with an adequate flow indicated; that the receiving system and its pressure-relief
mechanisms are intact; and that the tubing is patent and not obstructed or kinked.
Confirming the scavenging is functioning is important both to protect staff and
because a malfunctioning system could,
through its connection to the breathing system,
transmit abnormal pressure to the patient.
So scavenging is governed by occupational health regulations requiring the control
and monitoring of exposure, and by equipment standards specifying components,
connectors, pressure relief and performance,
and the system is checked before use — confirming its connection,
the function of the extraction, the integrity of the receiving system and relief
mechanisms, and the patency of the tubing — as part of the machine check.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this batch of physics stations. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Scavenging collects waste anaesthetic gases vented from the breathing system
(APL valve) and ventilator and conducts them to safe disposal,
to protect theatre staff from the pollution of their atmosphere with nitrous oxide
and volatile agents and to limit environmental release.
Second, Occupational concern about chronic trace exposure (possible effects on
reproduction, bone marrow, liver and nervous system;
nitrous oxide inactivates vitamin B12) drove scavenging and exposure limits,
though evidence of harm at modern low concentrations is weak - exposure is
minimised on precautionary grounds.
Third, A scavenging system has four parts: collecting (at valve and ventilator),
transfer (wide-bore, distinctive 30 mm non-interchangeable connectors preventing
misconnection), receiving (reservoir buffering flow and protecting the patient),
and disposal (active powered extraction or passive to atmosphere).
4.
The receiving system protects the patient from pressure transmitted by the
scavenging system: NEGATIVE-pressure relief (air-break/open reservoir so active
suction draws room air, not the patient's gas) and POSITIVE-pressure relief
(venting to atmosphere if the disposal route obstructs, preventing barotrauma).
Fourth, The activated charcoal absorber passively adsorbs VOLATILE agents (not
nitrous oxide) and has a finite capacity needing replacement;
theatre ventilation (non-recirculating,
high air-change rate) dilutes residual fugitive gas,
and capture technologies plus low-flow anaesthesia reduce environmental release.
Thank you. That concludes the station.